>> Woodruff: SENTENCED TO DEATH.
A JURY DECIDES THE FATE OF
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV FOR HIS PART
IN THE 2013 BOMBINGS AT THE
BOSTON MARATHON.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD, MYANMAR MIGRANTS
STRANDED AT SEA, UNWELCOME ON
SHORE, DRIFT THE SOUTHEAST ASIAN
WATERS WITH FADING HOPES OF
SAFETY AND REFUGE.
AND IT'S FRIDAY, MARK SHIELDS
AND DAVID BROOKS ARE HERE,
TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S NEWS.
AND:
LET THE GOOD TIMES ROLL
>> Woodruff: THE KING OF THE
BLUES, REMEMBERING B.B KING, WHO
SHAPED A GENRE OF MUSIC FOR
GENERATIONS.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE BOSTON MARATHON
BOMBER WAS SENTENCED TO DEATH
TODAY.
21-YEAR-OLD DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV
WAS CONVICTED BY A FEDERAL JURY
LAST MONTH OF THE APRIL, 2013,
BOMBINGS THAT KILLED THREE
BYSTANDERS NEAR THE FINISH LINE
OF THE ANNUAL RACE.
TSARNAEV AND HIS OLDER BROTHER,
TAMERLAN, LATER KILLED A
POLICEMEN DURING A MANHUNT.
THE ELDER TSARNAEV DIED IN A GUN
BATTLE WITH POLICE.
THE JURY CHOSE DEATH BY LETHAL
INJECTION OVER THE ONLY OTHER
OPTION: LIFE IN PRISON WITHOUT
POSSIBILITY OF RELEASE.
AFTER THE PENALTY WAS ANNOUNCED,
THE U.S. ATTORNEY WHO LED THE
PROSECUTION AND A BOMBING VICTIM
SPOKE.
>> TODAY, THE JURY HAS SPOKEN,
AND DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV WILL PAY
WITH HIS LIFE FOR HIS CRIMES.
MAKE NO MISTAKE, THE DEFENDANT
CLAIMED TO BE ACTING ON BEHALF
OF ALL MUSLIMS.
THERE WAS NOT A RELIGIOUS CRIME
AND IT CERTAINLY DOES NOT
REFLECT TRUE MUSLIM BELIEFS.
IT WAS A POLITICAL CRIME
DESIGNED TO INTIMIDATE AND TO
COERCE THE UNITED STATES.
>> THIS IS DIFFERENT BECAUSE
IT'S MORE COMPLETE, I GUESS IS
HOW I'M GOING TO SAY IT.
I KNOW THERE IS STILL A LONG
ROAD AHEAD.
THERE WILL BE MANY, MANY, MANY
MORE DATES AHEAD, BUT RIGHT NOW
IT FEELS LIKE WE CAN TAKE A
BREATH.
>> Woodruff: IN A STATEMENT
RELEASED SHORTLY AFTER
SENTENCING, THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, LORETTA LYNCH, SAID:
"NO VERDICT CAN HEAL THE SOULS
OF THOSE WHO LOST LOVED ONES,
NOR THE MINDS AND BODIES OF
THOSE WHO SUFFERED LIFE-CHANGING
INJURIES FROM THIS COWARDLY
ATTACK.
BUT THE ULTIMATE PENALTY IS A
FITTING PUNISHMENT FOR THIS
HORRIFIC CRIME."
FOR MORE WE TURN TO EMILY ROONEY
OF WGBH-TV IN BOSTON, WHO HAS
BEEN REPORTING ON THE TRIAL
THROUGHOUT.
EMILY ROONEY, YOU HAVE BEEN
REPORTING ON THIS TRIAL.
HELP US UNDERSTAND HOW THE
JURORS WERE ASKED TO REACH THIS
DECISION.
THEY WERE ASKED TO LOOK AT 12
DIFFERENT FACTORS.
IS THAT RIGHT?
>> WELL, IT WAS A VERY COMPLEX
JURY SLIP, AS THEY CALL IT.
IT WAS 24 PAGES LONG.
THE FIRST PART OF IT WAS VERY
SIMPLE.
IT WAS WHAT THEY CALLED GATEWAY
FACTORS, COULD THEY ESTABLISH HE
WAS 18 YEARS OR OLDER AT THE
TIME OF THE CRIME.
IT GOT MORE COMPLICATED AND
AGGREGATED.
ONCE YOU DETERMINED SOMETHING,
YOU HAD TO ADD THAT AND CARRY IT
ALL THE WAY.
THEN AGGREGATING FACTORS AND
MILLET GAITING FACTORS.
THE KEY WAS THEY ONLY HAD TO
DECIDE ON ONE OF THE COUNTS.
ALL 12 JURORS ONLY HAD TO AGREE
ON ONE OF THE COUNTS IF THE
DEATH PENALTY WAS TO BE APPLIED.
IT TURNS OUT THEY AGREED ON MORE
THAN ONE SO IT WAS AUTOMATIC.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU HAVE A
SENSE FROM HAVING LISTENED TO
THE ARGUMENTS DURING THE ENTIRE
SENTENCING PHASE OF WHAT THE
STRONGEST ARGUMENTS WERE?
>> I WILL HAVE TO SAY I WAS
INCREDIBLY IMPRESSED BY BOTH
SIDES.
THE PROSECUTION HAD THE
ADVANTAGE OF GOING FIRST AND
THEN LAST.
THE DEFENSE CAME IN BETWEEN.
YOU KNOW, JUDY CLARKE WHO ARGUED
FOR THE DEFENSE SAID THERE ARE
ANSWER WE WILL NEVER HAVE AS TO
WHY DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV DID THIS,
BUT SHE ARGUED HE NEVER WOULD
HAVE DONE IT HAD IT NOT BEEN FOR
HIS OLDER BROTHER.
ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU KNOW, THE
PROSECUTION ARGUED THAT HE HAD A
CONSCIENCE OF HIS OWN AND YOU
COULD TELL BY THE THINGS HE
WROTE INSIDE OF THE BOAT THAT
NIGHT THAT HE INTENDED TO DO
THIS.
THE PROSECUTION SAID ONE OTHER
THING TO MITIGATE PEOPLE'S
CONCERNS ABOUT HE WANTED TO DIE
A MARTYR.
HE SAID, HE'S NOT DYING THE WAY
HE WANTS TO DIE.
HE'S GOING TO DIE THE WAY HE
DESERVES TO DIE.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV, AT LEAST HAS BEEN
REPORTED, THROUGHOUT THIS TRIAL
HAS SHOWN VERY LITTLE EMOTION OR
REMORSE ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED.
IS IT BELIEVED FROM TALKING TO
LAWYERS THAT THAT MAKES A
DIFFERENCE AS JURORS DECIDE ON
THE SENTENCE?
>> WELL, AS YOU CAN IMAGINE,
JUDGE GEORGE O'TOOLE WHO
PRESIDED OVER THE TRIAL TOLD THE
JURORS THEY COULD NOT TAKE THAT
INTO CONSIDERATION, A
DEFENDANT'S DEMEANOR AND ACTIONS
IN COURT HAD NOTHING TO DO WITH
THIS, BUT IT WOULD BE HARD NOT
TO.
THE ONLY MOTION HE SHARED AT ALL
IS WHEN ONE OF HIS AUNTS FROM
RUSSIA WAS ON THE STAND AND HE
WIPED AWAY A TEAR, BLEW HER A
KISS.
HE DIDN'T ENGAGE WITH ANY OF THE
VICTIMS.
I ONLY SAW HIM ONCE WHEN JESSICA
KENSKI WHO LOST BOTH LEGS ROLLED
PAST HIM, HE GLANCED AT HER
STUMPS.
I SAW HIM ONCE LOOK AT THE JURY
AT THE TIME THE JUDGE WAS
CHARGING HIM.
FOR THE MOST PART, HE WAS LAID
BACK, SLUMPED IN HIS CHAIR,
PULLED AT HIS BEARD, DIDN'T LOOK
AROUND THE ROOM, WASN'T CURIOUS
AS TO WHO WAS THERE.
WE'LL NEVER KNOW WHETHER HIS
ATTORNEYS ADVISED HIM TO DO THAT
OR NOT.
THEY HAVEN'T SAID.
>> Woodruff: WE JUST HEARKSD
EMILY, FROM ONE OF THE FAMILY
MEMBERS OF ONE OF THE VICTIMS.
ARE YOU GETTING A SENSE OF WHAT
THE OTHER RELATIVES OF THE
VICTIMS ARE SAYING IN REACTION?
>> WE'VE GOTTEN TO KNOW A LOT OF
THEM.
NO ONE'S THROWING BALLOONS BUT
THERE ARE THOSE WHO ARE GREATLY
RELIEVED.
LIZ NORTON WHOSE TWO SONS LOST
LEGS, SHELVES JUSTICE WAS
SERVED.
MICHAEL WARD, YOU COULD SEE HIS
ANGER AS HE TOOK THE PODIUM.
HE, TOO, FEELS JUSTICE WAS
SERVED.
THERE ARE OTHER PEOPLE LIKE THE
FAMILY OF 8-YEAR-OLD MARTIN
RICHARD WHO WAS IN COURT BURKS
THEY WANTED T TO MOVE ON AND HAE
HIM SENTENCED TO LIFE IN PRISON
BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T WANT A
PROLONGED AND PROTRACTED APPEALS
SITUATION WHICH EVENTUALLY WE
WILL HAVE.
>> Woodruff: IS THERE A WAY OF
REFLECTING HOW BOSTON FEELS
ABOUT THIS?
>> IT'S VERY EMOTIONAL FOR
EVERYBODY.
OF COURSE, I COULDN'T BE THERE
TODAY, BUT THE TENSION AROUND
THIS TODAY WAS -- I THINK PEOPLE
FELT LIKE -- YOU KNOW, JUDY
CLARKE SAID, WELL, HE'S GOING TO
DIE IN JAIL, IT ONLY MATTERS
HOW.
AND I THINK HOW HE DOES DIE
MATTERS TO EVERYONE AND I THINK
THERE IS A LOT OF PRIVATE
FEELINGS ABOUT THIS.
SOME PEOPLE ARE EXPRESSING IT
OPENLY HE GOT WHAT HE DESERVED.
OTHERS ARE KEEPING IT TO
THEMSELVES AND THINKING THE JURY
DID THE RIGHT THING.
>> Woodruff: EMILY ROONEY WITH
WGBH-TV IN BOSTON.
WE THANK YOU.
U.S. MILITARY OFFICIALS HAVE
>> Woodruff: IN OTHER NEWS
TODAY, THE NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD SAID
THE ENGINEER OF THE DERAILED
AMTRAK TRAIN IN PHILADELPHIA WAS
"EXTREMELY COOPERATIVE" IN AN
INTERVIEW.
BRANDON BOSTIAN SAID HE WASN'T
TIRED OR ILL, AND DIDN'T HAVE
ANY PROBLEMS WITH HANDLING THE
TRAIN.
BUT HE DID REPORT TECHNICAL
PROBLEMS ON AN EARLIER TRIP TO
WASHINGTON.
TODAY, THE LAST DAMAGED RAIL
CARS WERE REMOVED FROM THE SITE,
PAVING THE WAY FOR CREWS TO
REPLACE THE DAMAGED TRACKS.
SERVICE WILL REMAIN SUSPENDED AT
LEAST THROUGH MONDAY, ON THE
HEAVILY-TRAVELED PHILADELPHIA TO
NEW YORK ROUTE.
WE'LL TALK WITH THE HEAD OF THE
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
RIGHT AFTER THIS NEWS SUMMARY.
U.S. MILITARY OFFICIALS HAVE
FOUND THE WRECKAGE OF THE MARINE
HELICOPTER THAT WENT MISSING
TUESDAY IN NEPAL, LIKELY KILLING
ALL EIGHT ON BOARD.
THE CHOPPER WENT DOWN ABOUT 50
MILES EAST OF KATHMANDU, IN AN
AREA HIT HARD BY THE LATEST
EARTHQUAKE.
SIX MARINES AND TWO NEPALESE
SOLDIERS WERE ON A RELIEF
MISSION.
THE U.S. COMMANDER IN NEPAL,
LIEUTENANT GENERAL JOHN WISSLER,
SAID DESPITE THE LOSSES, AID
EFFORTS WILL GO ON.
>> IT WILL NOT AFFECT THE
ONGOING MISSION OTHER THAN THE
FACT THAT WE WILL CONTINUE TO
MOURN THE LOSS OF AND OBSERVE
THE SACRIFICE OF THE GREAT
SOLDIERS FROM NEPAL AND OUR
MARINES WHO LOST THEIR LIVES,
BUT WE WILL CONTINUE EXECUTING
RELIEF JUST AS WE HAVE DONE
THROUGHOUT THE DAY TODAY.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA
EXPRESSED CONDOLENCES TO THE
FAMILIES OF THE CRASH VICTIMS
AND SAID THE MARINES "REPRESENT
A TRUTH THAT GUIDES OUR WORK
AROUND THE WORLD."
HE MADE THE REMARKS DURING THE
NATIONAL PEACE OFFICERS'
MEMORIAL SERVICE OUTSIDE THE
U.S. CAPITOL, PART OF NATIONAL
POLICE WEEK.
THE PRESIDENT MET WITH THE
FAMILIES OF FALLEN POLICEMEN AND
PLEDGED TO HONOR THEIR MEMORIES.
THE ANNUAL CEREMONY TAKES PLACE
AMID TENSIONS BETWEEN POLICE
FORCES AND COMMUNITIES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
>> WE CAN WORK HARDER AS A
NATION TO HEAL THE RIFTS THAT
STILL EXIST IN SOME PLACES
BETWEEN LAW ENFORCEMENT AND THE
PEOPLE YOU RISK YOUR LIVES TO
PROTECT.
WE OWE IT TO ALL OF YOU WHO WEAR
THE BADGE WITH HONOR AND WE OWE
IT TO YOUR FELLOW OFFICERS WHO
GAVE THEIR LAST FULL MEASURE OF
DEVOTION.
>> Woodruff: LAST YEAR, 131
POLICE OFFICERS IN THE UNITED
STATES DIED IN THE LINE OF DUTY.
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS WAGED A
FIERCE BATTLE IN IRAQ TODAY, IN
THE END RAISING THEIR BLACK FLAG
OVER THE MAIN GOVERNMENT
COMPOUND IN THE CITY OF RAMADI.
GOVERNMENT FORCES FOUGHT FROM
TRENCHES IN THE STREETS, BUT
WERE FORCED TO WITHDRAW FROM THE
COMPOUND AFTER THREE NEAR-
SIMULTANEOUS ATTACKS.
OTHER PARTS OF THE CITY ARE ALSO
UNDER ISLAMIC STATE CONTROL.
AT LEAST TEN POLICE WERE KILLED
DURING THE ATTACKS.
IN BURUNDI, THE GOVERNMENT SAID
IT HAS RESTORED ORDER AFTER
WEDNESDAY'S ATTEMPTED MILITARY
COUP FIZZLED.
THE PRESIDENT RETURNED TO THE
CAPITAL TODAY WHERE HE WAS MET
BY CROWDS OF SUPPORTERS
CELEBRATING IN THE STREETS.
GOVERNMENT FORCES ARRESTED SOME
OF THE MEMBERS BEHIND THE FAILED
COUP.
BUT THERE WAS STILL THE
POSSIBILITY OF RENEWED CLASHES,
AS PROTESTORS VOWED TO REVIVE
DEMONSTRATIONS AGAINST THE
PRESIDENT, WHOSE BID FOR A THIRD
TERM THEY CALL UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
POLICE IN MOZAMBIQUE HAVE SEIZED
NEARLY 1.3 TONS OF IVORY AND
RHINO HORNS.
THEY WERE FOUND AT THE HOME OF A
CHINESE NATIONAL ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF THE CAPITAL OF
MAPUTO, HE WAS ARRESTED TUESDAY.
THE CACHE INCLUDED 340 ELEPHANT
TUSKS AND 65 RHINO HORNS.
OFFICIALS ESTIMATE THAT'S
EQUIVALENT TO THE SLAUGHTER OF
235 ANIMALS.
VIRTUALLY ALL IVORY AND HORN
TRADE IS BANNED WORLDWIDE TO
PROTECT THE ANIMALS FROM
EXTINCTION.
BLUE BELL CREAMERIES, BASED IN
TEXAS, IS LAYING OFF MORE THAN A
THIRD OF ITS WORKFORCE AFTER A
SERIES OF LISTERIA ILLNESSES
WERE LINKED TO ITS ICE CREAM.
ALL OF ITS PLANTS REMAIN CLOSED,
AND MORE THAN 1,400 PEOPLE WILL
LOSE THEIR JOBS.
ON WALL STREET, STOCKS ENDED THE
DAY MOSTLY HIGHER.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 20 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,272.
THE NASDAQ FELL TWO POINTS AND
THE S-AND-P 500 GAINED A POINT.
FOR THE WEEK, THE MAJOR INDEXES
EACH GAINED A FRACTION OF A
PERCENT.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S POINT
PERSON FOR RAILROADS ON THE
DEADLY TRAIN DERAILMENT;
THE SOUTHEAST ASIA MIGRANT
CRIS;SI
CONGRESS REFRESHES THE BATTLE
OVER ABORTION;
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS ON
THE WEEK'S NEWS;
REMEMBERING LEGENDARY MUSICIAN
B.B. KING, WHO DEFINED THE
AMERICAN BLUES FOR GENERATIONS;
AND, HOW THE ARTS ARE HELPING
TALENTED YOUTH IN BALTIMORE
SUCCEED IN SCHOOL.
>> Woodruff: THE AMTRAK
DERAILMENT THIS WEEK HAS SET IN
MOTION A SERIES OF QUESTIONS AND
EXAMINATIONS ABOUT SAFETY
SYSTEMS FOR THE COUNTRY'S
RAILROADS, AND WHETHER THERE'S
BEEN ADEQUATE FUNDING AND
NECESSARY TECHNOLOGY COMMITTED
TO DOING SO.
EIGHT PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND
MORE THAN 200 INJURED WHEN THE
TRAIN LEFT THE TRACKS IN
PHILADELPHIA AT A SPEED OF MORE
THAN 100 MILES-AN-HOUR.
SARAH FEINBERG IS ACTING
ADMINISTRATOR OF THE FEDERAL
RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION, AN
AGENCY WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION THAT PROMOTES
SAFE RAIL TRANSPORTATION.
MS. FEINBERG, WELCOME TO THE
"NewsHour".
A LOT OF CONVERSATION, AS WE
WERE SAYING, ABOUT WHETHER THIS
ACCIDENT COULD HAVE BEEN
PREVENTED WITH SOME SORT OF
SAFETY MECHANISM.
IS THERE A MECHANISM O OR DEVICE
OR SYSTEM THAT COULD HAVE
PREVENTED IT?
>> WELL, THANKS FOR HAVING ME,
JUDY.
YOU KNOW, WE DON'T KNOW THE
CAUSE OF THE ACCIDENT YET.
THE NTSB IS THE LEAD
INVESTIGATIVE AGENCY INTO WHAT
CAUSED THIS ACCIDENT.
WE'LL KNOW MORE SOON.
BUT TO THE EXTENT THAT SPEED
COULD HAVE BEEN A FACTOR HERE OR
WAS A FACTOR HERE, WE KNOW THAT
POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL CAN HAVE
A HUGE IMPACT ON SPEED AND CAN
REALLY KEEP TRAINS FROM GOING
OVER SPEED.
SO IT'S A REALLY IMPORTANT
TECHNOLOGY THAT NEEDS TO GET
IMPLEMENTED ALONG THE COUNTRY'S
RAIL SYSTEM.
>> Woodruff: WHY IS IT
IMPLEMENTED?
IF IT'S KNOWN IT CAN MAKE A
DIFFERENCE IN A SITUATION LIKE
THIS, WHY ISN'T IT IN ALL
PASSENGER TRAINS?
>> CONGRESS PASSED A LAW
REQUIRING IT TO BE IMPLEMENTED
BY DECEMBER 31 OF 2015, SO THE
END OF THIS YEAR.
AMTRAK HAS SAID THEY WILL MEET
THAT DEADLINE.
OTHER COMMUTER RAILROADS AND
FREIGHT RAILS SAID THEY WILL
HAVE MEETING THAT DEADLINE.
IT'S AN INCREDIBLY EXPENSIVE AND
COMPLICATED TECHNOLOGY, BUT IT
IS A GAME-CHANGER IN TERMS OF
SAFETY, SO WE ARE REALLY PUSHING
RAILROADS TO WORK AS HARD AS
THEY POSSIBLY CAN TO MEET THE
DEADLINE.
>> Woodruff: IT'S OUR
UNDERSTANDING FROM REPORTS TODAY
INCLUDING ONE IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" IS PART OF THE ISSUE IS
RAILROADS HAVE NOT HAD ACCESS TO
BROAD BANNED TICKOLOGY TO ENABLE
THEM TO GET THIS IN PLACE AND
SOMETHING THAT CONGRESS
INITIALLY DENIED THEM ACCESS TO.
EXPLAIN THAT FOR US.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF COMPLICATED
FACTORS HERE AND A LOT OF
CHALLENGES FACING THE RAILROADS
AS THEY ATTEMPT TO IMPLEMENT THE
TECHNOLOGY.
ONE AS YOU MENTIONED IS
SPECTRUM.
THE RAILROADS LITERALLY HAVE TO
BUY SPECTRUM FROM SPECTRUM
QUARTERS OR SPECULATORS AND THEY
NEED IT TO RUN ALONG THE RAILS
AND WORK.
ANOTHER CHALLENGE IS EXPENSE.
IT'S A VERY COMPLICATED
TECHNOLOGY.
IT REQUIRES LITERALLY THE TRAIN
TO BE ABLE TO TALK TO THE
WAYSIDE DETECTOR AND THE WAYSIDE
DETECTOR TO BE ABLE TO TALK BACK
AND CONTROL THE SPEED OF THE
TRAIN, MAKE THE TRAIN TAKE
ACTIONS IN THE ENGINEER ISN'T
TAKING APPROPRIATE ACTIONS.
SO THERE ARE A LOT OF CHALLENGES
WITH THE RAILROADS IMPLEMENTING
THE TECHNOLOGY BUT THAT DOESN'T
MEAN WE SHOULD BE PUSHING THEM
TO DO IT ANYWAY.
>> Woodruff: AMERICANS ARE
FAMILIAR WITH HOW MUCH THE
GOVERNMENT -- THE LENGTHS THE
GOVERNMENT GOES TO MAKE SURE THE
FAA AND OTHER AGENCIES THAT
FLYING IS SAY. DO YOU THINK BY
CONTRAST THERE HASN'T BEEN
ENOUGH FOCUS ON SAFETY IN OUR
RAILROADS?
>> I'M SO THAT YOU BROUGHT THAT
UP, JUDY.
I THINK ABOUT THAT OFTEN.
IT IS INCREDIBLY SAFE TO FLY IN
AN AIRPLANE.
IT'S ALSO INCREDIBLY SAFE TO
RIDE ON A TRAIN.
300 MILLION AMERICANS HAVE
TRAVELED THE NORTHEAST CORRIDOR
IN RECENT YEARS.
IT'S INCREDIBLY SAFE TO BE ON A
TRAIN.
BUT THAT SAID, THE INDIVIDUALS
THAT WERE ON THIS TRAIN ON
TUESDAY NIGHT PUT THEIR LIVES IN
THE HANDS OF AN ENGINEER THAT
THEY HAVE TO ASSUME WILL NEVER
MAKE A MISTAKE OR NOT HAVE A A
MEDICAL EVENT, WILL NOT HAVE
SOME SORT OF ISSUE IN THE CAB.
RAIL TRAVEL IS INCREDIBLY SAFE,
BUT WHY WOULD WE NOT IMPLEMENT A
TECHNOLOGY THAT CAN TAKE A HUMAN
FACTOR OR HUMAN ERROR OFF THE
TABLE?
>> Reporter
>> Woodruff: AND ONLY ONE
PERSON REQUIRED TO BE IN THAT AS
ENGINEER, WHEREAS ON AN AIRPLANE
IT'S TWO PEOPLE.
>> WELL, AND THERE'S A DEBATE
THAT GOES BACK AND FORTH ON
THAT.
THERE IS ONE THEORY IF YOU ADD
MORE PEOPLE TO THE CAB, THAT CAN
POSSIBLY DISTRACT THE ENGINEER.
YOU ALSO DON'T WANT PERSONAL
CONVERSATIONS HAPPENING IN THE
CAB WHEN AN ENGINEER FEEDS NEEDS
TO BE SOLELY FOCUSED ON
OPERATING THAT TRAIN.
SO THAT DEBATE GOES BACK AND
FORTH, BUT IT'S SOMETHING WE'RE
CONSTANTLY LOOKING AT AT THE
FRA.
>> Woodruff: SARAH FEINBERG
ACTING ADMINISTRATOR AT THE
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION.
WE THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: NOW, A STORY OF
DESPERATION AND MIGRATION, AS
REFUGEES TAKE TO THE SEA IN
ASIA, BUT STRUGGLE TO FIND SAFE
HARBOR.
HARI SREENIVASAN REPORTS ON THIS
BURGEONING HUMANITARIAN CRISIS
IN THE REGION, ONE NO COUNTRY IS
IN A RUSH TO SOLVE.
>> HELLO, HOW LONG HAVE YOU BEEN
ON THE BOAT?
>> Sreenivasan: THE PEOPLE ON
THIS RICKETY FISHING BOAT SAY
THEY HAVE BEEN AT SEA FOR THREE
MONTHS, FLEEING POVERTY IN
BANGLADESH AND PERSECUTION IN
MYANMAR, ONCE CALLED BURMA.
THE CAPTAIN AND CREW ABANDONED
THEM SIX DAYS AGO, THEY TOLD
JOURNALISTS FROM THE NEW YORK
TIMES, WHO FILMED THIS VIDEO.
IN RECENT DAYS THEY WERE TURNED
AWAY FROM THAILAND, MALAYSIA AND
INDONESIA.
THEY'RE PART OF AN ESTIMATED
6,000 PEOPLE ON BOATS IN THE
WATERS AROUND THE THREE NATIONS.
1600 OTHER MIGRANTS WERE RESCUED
BY THE MALAYSIAN AND INDONESIAN
NAVIES EARLIER THIS WEEK.
SINCE NOVEMBER AN ESTIMATED 20
TO 25,000 PEOPLE HAVE LEFT
MYANMAR AND BANGLADESH.
MANY ARE FROM THE ROHINGYA, A
MUSLIM MINORITY, WHICH HAS BEEN
PERSECUTED BY THE MYANMAR
GOVERNMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ON THE
EXODUS FROM MYANMAR AND
BANGLADESH WE TURN TO SARNATA
REYNOLDS, SENIOR ADVISOR ON
HUMAN RIGHTS AT REFUGEES
INTERNATIONAL, A NON PROFIT
ORGANIZATION THAT ADVOCATES ON
BEHALF OF REFUGEES.
LET'S BRING OUR AUDIENCE UP TO
SPEED.
WHO ARE THESE PEOPLE?
WHY ARE THEY GETTING IN BOATS
AND RUNNING FROM WHERE THEY LIVE
TODAY.
>> THEY'RE AN ETHNIC MINORITY IN
MYANMAR, ABOUT 1. 1.3 MILLION IN
THE COUNTRY, THOUGH 10% HAVE
FLED ON BOATS IN THE LAST YEARS.
THEY HAVE LIVED IN THE COUNTRY
FOR GENERATIONS.
SOME FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS.
BUT THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED
TO PERSECUTE THEM AND HAS, OVER
THE LAST THREE YEARS, BEATEN
THEM WITH IMPUNITY, PUT THEM
INTO CAMPS, TOLD THEM THEY HAVE
TO CALL THEMSELVES BENGALY OR
THEY WILL BE DETAINED AND
BASICALLY LEFT ALL HUMANITARIAN
ACCESS OUT SO THEY CAN'T EVEN
GET FOOD OR MEDICAL CARE OR GO
TO SCHOOL.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS IRONIC
BECAUSE MYANMAR HAS BEEN TAKING
STEPS TO OPENING ECONOMICALLY
AND POLITICALLY BUT IN THIS
PARTICULAR SECT OF THE
POPULATION, DOESN'T SEEM LIKE
THIS IS A PRIORITY AT ALL.
>> AND IT'S GOTTEN WORSE AS THE
COUNTRY IS OPENING TO THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
THE STATE OF THE REFUGEES HAS
DECLINED.
>> Reporter: WHAT IS IT LIKE
WHEN THEY GET ON THESE BOATS?
>> I HAVE TALKED TO RUHINGA
ABOUT THE PASSAGE.
I TALKED TO PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
ON THE BOATS AND SENT BACK AND
PEOPLE WHO WILL TAKE THE JOURNEY
WHEN I WAS THERE LAST FALL.
OFTENTIMES -- THEY'VE GOTTEN ON
A BOAT AND THEY KNOW THEY'RE
PROBABLY GOING TO HAVE TO WORK
ON LAND WHEREVER THEY GO,
HOPEFULLY MALAYSIA AT THIS
POINT, THEY KNOW THEY WILL OWE
MONEY FOR THE PASSAGE BUT HOPE
THEY DON'T BECOME PREY OF
TRAFFICKERS.
THEY KNOW IT'S A RISK.
THEY KNOW BEING DETAINED UPON
ARRIVAL IS A RISK, BUT THEY'RE
SO DESPERATE TO LEAVE THEY TAKE
THE RISK ANYWAY.
THE JOURNEY IS BRUTAL.
THEY DON'T KNOW HOW LONG THEY
WILL BE ON THE WATER.
IF THEY'RE FED, IT'S NOT MUCH.
AND WATER IS ALWAYS AN ISSUE.
>> Sreenivasan: A COUPLE OF
DAYS AGO WE HAD A NAVY VESSEL
FROM ONE OF THE COUNTRIES
RESTOCK THEM WITH SUPPLIES AND
LEAVE THEM AT SEA.
WHY AREN'T THE COUNTRIES TAKING
THEM IN?
WHAT'S THE JUSTIFICATION OR
RATIONALE FOR HOW THEIR
IMMIGRATION POLICY IS?
>> THERE'S NO GOOD RATIONALE FOR
LEAVING PEOPLE TO DIE AT SEA.
THE REASON THAT COUNTRIES ARE
REACTING IN THIS WAY IS BECAUSE
THE RUHINGA HAS BEEN FLEEING FOR
DECADES.
THEY CAN BASICALLY WALK FROM
WHERE THEY'RE FROM BUT
BANGLADESH HAS TOO MANY AND SAID
NO MORE.
THAILAND IS WHERE THEY WENT
NEXT, THE CLOSEST AFTER THAT.
THERE'S ALREADY 100,000 THERE
AND THAILAND CLOSED ITS DOORS,
PUTTING PEOPLE IN DETENTION AND
PEOPLE END UP IN TERRIBLE
TRAFFICKING CAMPS IN THE JUNGLE
AND LEFT TO DIE THERE.
THERE HAVE BEEN MASS GRAVES
FOUND THERE AS WELL IN THE LAST
FEW WEEKS.
MALAYSIA AND INDONESIA BASICALLY
SAY THIS ISN'T OUR PROBLEM, THIS
IS MYANMAR'S PROBLEM, AND
THEY'RE RIGHT.
UNFORTUNATELY IN THE MEAN TIME,
WHILE THE PERSECUTION CONTINUES,
THEY HAVE TO PROTECT THESE
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
TO THE PEOPLE WHO MAKE IT
SOMEHOW ON LAND WHETHER
ILLEGALLY OR NOT GET THROUGH,
WHAT'S THEIR LIFE LIKE IN THESE
COUNTRIES?
>> IT'S UNFORTUNATELY GENERALLY
MISERABLE SO MOST WILL PROBABLY
BE DETAINED WHEN THEY ARRIVE IF
THEY'RE PICKED UP.
IF THEY GET THROUGH THEY WON'T
BE, THEY'RE AT THE BOTTOM OF
SOCIETY.
THEY HAVE NO DOCUMENTATION
WHATSOEVER.
THEY ARE DESPERATE TO MAKE ANY
INCOME.
OF COURSE THEY'RE GOING TO TAKE
THE HARDEST JOBS.
I TALKED TO ONE MAN WHO TOLD ME
HE LEFT SO HE COULD MAKE MONEY
SO HIS FAMILY IN THE CAMPS IN
MYANMAR CAN HAVE FOOD AND
MEDICINE BECAUSE THEY CAN'T GET
FOOD AND MEDICINE AND HE SAID
BASICALLY HE WORKED EVERYWHERE
AND ANYWHERE, THE DIRTIEST AND
MOST DANGEROUS WORK, DIDN'T
MATTER, IT WAS WORK.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
SARNATA REYNOLDS, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Reporter: THE ABORTION DEBATE
>> Woodruff: THIS WEEK THE U.S.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SAW
ANOTHER FIERY HEALTH CARE
DEBATE, THIS TIME FOCUSED ON
ABORTION.
OUR POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS REPORTS FROM CAPITOL
HILL ON HOW REPUBLICANS HOPE TO
MOVE THE FAMILIAR DEBATE INTO A
NEW GEAR, AND HOW DEMOCRATS HOPE
TO STOP THEM.
>> Reporter: THE ABORTION DEBATE
IS RAGING AGAIN IN WASHINGTON
OVER AN OLD QUESTION, THE
QUESTION OF VIABILITY.
WEDNESDAY, ON A NEARLY PARTY-
LINE VOTE, HOUSE REPUBLICANS
PASSED A BILL TO BAN MOST
ABORTIONS AFTER 20 WEEKS OF
PREGNANCY, CURRENT FEDERAL LAW
ALLOWS ABORTION UP TO 24 WEEKS.
GOP LEADERS LIKE HOUSE SPEAKER
BOEHNER CROWED ABOUT THE BILL.
>> H.R. 36 IS THE MOST PRO-LIFE
LEGISLATION TO EVER COME BEFORE
THIS BODY.
>> Reporter: THE BILL FOCUSES ON
THE QUESTION OF WHEN DOES A
FETUS FEEL PAIN, SOMETHING THAT
IS UNDER DEBATE.
THAT'S NOT NEW.
WHAT IS NEW IS ANOTHER MEDICAL
QUESTION, WHEN CAN A FETUS
SURVIVE OUTSIDE THE WOMB.
THIS RECENT STUDY IN THE NEW
ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE
CONCLUDES THAT WITH MEDICAL
INTERVENTION A SMALL FRACTION OF
22-WEEK-OLD BABIES CAN SURVIVE
WITH NO IMPAIRMENTS OR
DISABILITIES.
REPUBLICAN REPRESENTATIVE DIANE
BLACK OF TENNESSEE SHEPHERDED
THE 20-WEEK BILL THROUGH THE
HOUSE.
>> AS A NURSE AND SOMEONE WHO'S
BEEN IN NURSI FORNG 40 YEARS.
WHEN I FIRST CAME INTO NURSING
BACK IN 1969, IF A BABY WAS BORN
BECAUSE WE DIDN'T HAVE THE
MEDICAL CAPABILITIES TO HELP
THAT BABY TO SURVIVE.
AND NOW WE SEE BABIES BEING BORN
AT 20 WEEKS.
>> Reporter: BUT AS BLACK AND
OTHER REPUBLICANS PUSH FOR
ADDITIONAL ABORTION BANS,
DEMOCRATS LIKE DIANA DEGETTE OF
COLORADO PUSH BACK.
DEGETTE, WHO HAS INTRODUCED
BILLS TO DEFEND ABORTION ACCESS,
ARGUES THAT THE 20-WEEK BAN IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
AND THE QUESTION OF VIABILITY AT
20 WEEKS IS MISCONSTRUED.
>> VERY FEW WOMEN HAVE ABORTIONS
AFTER 20 WEEKS AND GENERALLY
WHEN THAT HAPPENS, IT'S BECAUSE
THERE ARE SOME VERY SERIOUS
FETAL ABNORMALITY THAT'S GONNA
AFFECT THE HEALTH OF THE WOMAN.
SO WHAT THIS BILL REALLY DOES IS
SAY POLITICIANS ARE GOING TO
SUBSTITUTE THEIR JUDGMENT IN
THOSE FEW CASES, FOR THE
JUDGMENT OF THE WOMAN IN
CONSULTATION WITH HER FAMILY AND
HER PHYSICIAN.
>> Reporter: TO DEGETTE AND
ABORTION SUPPORTERS TH BILISL IS
ANOTHER ASSAULT ON THE RIGHTS OF
WOMEN TO DECIDE FOR THEMSELVES.
THE 20-WEEK ABORTION BAN HAS
LITTLE CHANCE OF BECOMING
FEDERAL LAW ANYTIME SOON, WITH
TOUGH HURDLES IN THE SENATE AND
A GUARANTEED VETO BY THE WHITE
HOUSE.
BUT THIS WEEK'S VOTE IS NOT JUST
A SYMBOLIC GESTURE.
CONSERVATIVES ARE FOCUSED ON A
VERY PARTICULAR TARGET.
THAT TARGET SITS ON THE U.S.
SUPREME COURT.
DREW HALFMANN STUDIES ABORTION
POLITICS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA AT DAVIS.
>> IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO MOVE
PUBLIC OPINION ON ABORTION.
BUT PUBLIC OPINION DOESN'T MAKE
POLICY, THE SUPREME COURT MAKES
POLICY.
THIS DEBATE HAS AN AUDIENCE OF
ONE, JUSTICE KENNEDY.
>> Reporter: OVER THE LAST TWO
DECADES SUPREME COURT JUSTICE
ANTHONY KENNEDY HAS CAST
DECIDING VOTES ON BOTH SIDES OF
THE ABORTION DEBATE, TILTING THE
5-4 BALANCE TO UPHOLD ABORTION
ACCESS IN SOME CASES AND ALLOW
RESTRICTIONS ON THINGS LIKE
PARTIAL BIRTH ABORTION.
IF A CASE DOES GET TO THE
SUPREME COURT ANTI-ABORTION
GROUPS ARE HOPING THAT THE
PASSAGE OF A 20-WEEK ABORTION
BAN BY THE HOUSE MIGHT INFLUENCE
JUSTICE KENNEDY'S VOTE.
>> IN CASES OVER CASES OF SO
CALLED PARTIAL BIRTH ABORTION HE
WAS THE KEY VOTER.
SO THESE ARE AIMED AT JUSTICE
KENNEDY, AN ATTEMPT TO GET THE
ISSUE AT COURT AGAIN.
>> THE NAYS ARE 144, WITH ONE
VOTING PRESENT.
THE BILL IS PASSED.
>> Reporter: THE BILL HAS ONE
MORE AUDIENCE, 2016 REPUBLICAN
VOTERS, AS THE PARTY HOPES TO
REGAIN THE WHITE HOUSE, AND WITH
IT MORE DIRECT SAY ON THE
COMPOSITION OF THE SUPREME
COURT.
LISA DESJARDINS, PBS NEWSHOUR,
CAPITOL HILL.
>> Woodruff: THIS WEEK WE SAW
BATTLES BETWEEN BRETHREN,
DEMOCRATS IN CONGRESS FOUGHT
AGAINST PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TOUTED
TRADE DEAL, WHILE ELSEWHERE, JEB
BUSH STRUGGLED AGAINST HIS
BROTHER'S PRESIDENTIAL LEGACY ON
THE QUESTION OF THE IRAQ WAR.
ALL THIS AS A DEADLY TRAIN CRASH
HAS RENEWED A NATIONAL DEBATE ON
AMERICA'S INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE TURN NOW TO THE ANALYSIS OF
SHIELDS AND BROOKS, THAT'S
SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND NEW YORK TIMES
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
GENTLEMEN, WELCOME.
I WANT TO ASK YOU FIRST ABOUT
THE BOSTON VERDICT, SENTENCING
VERDICT.
MARK, YOU'RE FROM BOSTON.
THIS IS THE DEATH SENTENCE,
UNANIMOUS DEATH SENTENCE.
>> IT IS, JUDY, AND THE ONE JUST
OUTSTANDING IMAGE I HAVE IS THAT
OF BILL AND DENISE RICHARD, THE
PARENTS OF LITTLE MARTIN, THE
LITTLE ANGEL, 8 YEARS OLD, BLOWN
UP IN FRONT OF THEIR EYES WHILE
THEIR DAUGHTER JANE LOST HER
LEG, AND THEIR REQUEST TO GIVE
LIFE WITHOUT PAROLE, OTHERWISE,
THEY SAID, THE DEATH SENTENCE,
EVERY APPEAL, WE'LL RELIFE THE
WORST DAY OF OUR LIFE.
IT IS AN ASPECT THAT APPEALED TO
ME BUT AS POINTED OUT BY THE
PROSECUTION, HE PUT THE BOMB
FOUR FEET AWAY FROM A ROW OF
CHILDREN.
IT WAS ANHORR IFIC, INHUMAN ACT.
SO, YOU KNOW, MY HEART GOES OUT
TO THE RICHARD FAMILY AND
EVERYBODY ELSEWHO IS TOUCHED
WITH THE PAIN.
>> Woodruff: THE JURY WENT IN
THE OTHER DIRECTION.
>> AND SOME OTHER FAMILIES
WANTED THIS OUTCOME.
THERE WAS DIVISION AMONG THEM.
I PERSONALLY AM SKEPTICAL OF THE
DEATH PENALTY IN CASES WHERE WE
DON'T KNOW, THERE HAVE BEEN SO
MANY WRONGFUL CONVICTIONS, SO
I'M NOT A FAN OF THE DEATH
PENALTY.
NEVERTHELESS, I THOUGHT WHAT
LORETTA LYNCH THE NEW ATTORNEY
GENERAL SAID TODAY IS THIS WAS
TRULY THE MOST HORRENDOUS CRIME
IMAGINABLE AND THE ULTIMATE
PENALTY IS FITTING.
I HAVE SOME SYMPATHY, AND THIS
IS NOT A CASE WHERE WE HAVE TOO
MUCH DOUBT ABOUT WHO DID IT, WE
KNOW THIS GUY DID IT AND KILLED
KILLED THE CHILDREN AND AND
KILLED A COP A COUPLE OF DAYS
LATER, AND IF THERE'S EVER GOING
TO BE A DEATH PENALTY, I BELIEVE
THIS IS THE CASE.
WHETHER HE WILL EVER GET
EXECUTED, I DON'T KNOW IF THEY
EVER WILL, BECAUSE THE APPEALS
TAKE SO LONG, BUT I GUESS IT'S
FITTING IN THIS CASE.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER TRAGEDY
THIS WEEK IS THE TRAIN CRASH,
TRAIN GOING OFF THE RAILS IN
PHILADELPHIA, EIGHT PEOPLE
KILLED, 200 INJURED.
A LOT OF CONVERSATION ABOUT THE
ROLE OF SAFETY IN THE RAILROADS.
WE INTERVIEWED SARAH FEINBERG A
MINUTE AGO, HEAD OF THE FEDERAL
RAILROAD ASSOCIATION, AND
WHETHER THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
SHOULD BE DOING MORE, JOHN
BOEHNER WAS ASKED THAT QUESTION,
HE SAID THE QUESTION WAS STUPID
BECAUSE OF TRAIN SPEED.
SHOULD WE BE THINKING ABOUT
GOVERNMENT LEVEL OR IS THAT THE
WRONG WAY TO GO?
>> IT'S LATE TO ARGUED ABOUT
GOVERNMENT ROLE.
RAILROADS WEREN'T BUILT BUT FOR
THE GOVERNMENT.
THE TRANSCONTINTALNE RAILROAD
WAS BUILT BY THE GOVERNMENT AND
FUNDED TO CONNECT CALIFORNIA
WITH THE REST OF THE COUNTRY AND
FOUGHT THE CIVIL WAR AND HAVE
BEEN A POLICY OF LONGSTANDING.
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT 750,000
AMERICANS EVERY DAY USE THE
NORTHEAST CORRIDOR OF THE
AMTRAK.
WITHOUT IT, YOU'TA
CONGESTION AND ECONOMIC
DISLOCATION.
JUST TRAFFIC WOULD BE
IMPOSSIBLE.
I THINK IT'S IN
INTEREST.
SPEAKER BOEHNER KNOWS WHAT HE
WAS SPEAKING ABOUT POLITICALLY.
I THOUGHT IT WAS THE TERRIBLE
USE OF THE WORD "STUPID."
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT THE STATES,
BEGINS IN WASHINGTON, D.C.,
MARYLAND, DELAWARE, NEW JERSEY,
PENNSYLVANIA, NEW YORK,
CONNECTICUT, RHODE ISLAND,
MASSACHUSETTS, NEW HAMPSHIRE,
MAINE.
WHAT DO THEY HAVE IN COMMON?
THEY'RE BLUE, QUITE FRANKLY AND
BLUNTLY, THEY VOTE DEMOCRATIC.
IN A SENSE, REPUBLICANS IN THE
HOUSE HAVE PRECIOUS LITTLE
INTEREST IN THE NORTHEAST
CORRIDOR.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING
THERE IS A CONNECTION.
>> I THINK A DEFINITELY
CONNECTION.
>> I WONDER IF TRAIN USE MAKES
PEOPLE LIBERAL.
I TAKE IT THREE TIMES A WEEK TO
NEW HAVEN.
I WONDER IF THE CRASH COULD HAVE
BEEN PREVENTED WITH MORE
SPENDING.
WE JUST HEARD SAFETY MEASURES
THAT COULD HAVE PREVENTED THE
CRASH WERE BEING IMPLEMENTED.
IN THIS PARTICULAR CASE, THE
RAIN WAS GOING A RIDICULOUS
SPEED.
OVER 100 MILES AN HOUR.
I CAN'T IMAGINE WHAT IT WOULD
HAVE FELT LIKE.
WHETHER WE SHOULD BE SPENDING
MORE, IT'S CLEAR.
FOR PEOPLE WHO WRITE IT
CONSTANTLY, YOU KNOW IF YOU RIDE
IT THIS MUCH THAT YOU'RE GOING
FAST IN A CERTAIN STRETCH,
TERRIBLY SLOW IN ANOTHER.
SOME OF THE THINGS BETWEEN THE
TRACKS ARE STILL MADE OUT OF
WOOD, AND WE'RE JUST NOT
SPENDING ENOUGH ON THIS LET
ALONE THE INFRASTRUCTURE OF THE
BRIDGES AND ALL THE OTHER STUFF.
IT'S NOT A CONTROVERSIAL
STATEMENT TO SAY WE SHOULD BE
SPENDING HUNLSES OF BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS ON INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> SEEMS LIKE SO MUCH LESS
ATTENTION PAID ON THIS THAN
AIRLINES.
CLEARLY WE NEED TO PAY ATTENTION
TO AIRLINE SAFETY.
>> NO QUESTION.
I AGREE.
THE FACT IS THE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE OF THE COUNTRY IS
IN DISREPAIR.
THE FAILURE TO INVEST IN OUR
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC
LIFE, I THINK, IS A SCANDAL AND
A SHAME AND IT SHOULD BE A
NATIONAL EMBARRASSMENT.
>> TRADE AUTHORITY.
BIG VOTE IN THE CONGRESS THIS
WEEK.
IT DIDN'T GO IN THE PRESIDENT'S
DIRECTION.
AT LEAST THE PROCEDURAL VOTE.
ARE WE SEEING A SPIRIT AMONG
DEMOCRATS.
WHAT IS GOING ON HERE AND WHAT
DOES IT SAY ABOUT THE ONGOING
PROBLEMS THE PRESIDENT MAY HAVE
IN HIS OWN PARTY?
>> WELL, FIRST, THERE'S JUST THE
TACTICAL ISSUE.
THE PRESIDENT DIDN'T REACH OUT
ENOUGH.
WE'VE COME TO EXPECT IT FROM THE
WHITE HOUSE THAT THEY DON'T
FORESEE PROBLEMS THEY PROBABLY
SHOULD.
THAT'S BEEN A RUNNING WEAKNESS
OF THE ADMINISTRATION, I WOULD
SAY.
SECOND, IT'S TRUE THAT THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY IS BECOMING
MORE SPLIT ESPECIALLY ON THE
SENATE LEVEL.
THERE WAS ALWAYS A HOUSE
MINORITY ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE
THAT WERE SUSPICIOUS OF TRADE
BUT NOW AT THE SENATE LEVEL AND
THAT'S REFLEC REFLECTIVE OF A PY
MOVING LEFT AND THE FACT OF
WHETHER TRADE BENEFITS AMERICANS
IS A DIVIDED ARGUMENT AMONGT THS
WEEK ON THE MERITS.
WE CAN HAVE ARGUMENTS ABOUT
WHETHER NAFTA HELPS OR HURTS THE
UNITED STATES.
I THINK THE EFFECT IS PROBABLY
MINIMALLY THE WAY.
IT HAD A HUGE POSITIVE EFFECT ON
MEXICO.
I THINK IT'S A TRANSFORMED
COUNTRY, BETTER COUNTRY, SENDING
FEWER ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS TO US,
HAS MUCH MORE OPPORTUNITY, A
BETTER TRADE PARTNER IN POLICY
TERMS.
THE ARGUMENT WERE THESE KIND OF
TRADE AGREEMENTS ARE A NET
BENEFIT FOR THE WORLD, FOREIGN
POLICY AND FOR US, TOO.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU SEE
IT?
>> MANSFIELD, OHIO -- THE
POLITICAL REALITY IS THE
PRESIDENT IS LUCKY RIGHT NOW AND
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES IF
HE'S IN THE TEENS ON DEMOCRATIC
SUPPORT.
IT'S THAT LOW.
AND IF DAVID'S RIGHT, THERE IS A
LACK OF PERSONAL TOUCH.
BARACK OBAMA, EVEN HIS GREATEST
ADMIRER IS TERRIBLE AT THIS.
HE DOESN'T REACH OUT.
THERE'S NO PERSONAL CONNECTION.
HE'S NOW TRYING TO APPEAL TO A
CONGRESSIONAL BLACK CAUCUS
MEMBERS.
KEITH ALLISON FROM MINNESOTA
SAID IF BARACK OBAMA NEEDS A
KIDNEY, I COULD SORT OF GIVE HIM
ONE.
I WILL NOT GIVE HIM MY VOTE ON
THIS.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE BLACK
CAUCUS, NORTH CAROLINA, THE THEE
WATCHED JOBS CLOSE.
IT'S A PROBLEM.
THE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED STATES
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT DOUBLED,
MORE THAN 8 TRILLION TO
17.1 TRILLION AND THE MEDIAN
HOUSEHOLD INCOME WENT DOWN.
SO, YES, IT'S A BIG PICTURE,
TERRIFIC.
FOR INDIVIDUAL PEOPLE WHO HAVE
HAD FACTORIES CLOSE, I MEAN, YOU
CAN'T POINT TO PEOPLE AND SAY,
BOYS, BECAUSE OF NAFTA, ALL
THESE JOBS CAME IN.
YOU POINT TO TOWN AFTER TOWN
WHERE FACTORIES CLOSE AFTER
NAFTA AS A CONSEQUENCE OF NAFTA
AND OVERPROMISED AND
UNDERDELIVERED ND TAHAT'S WHY
THERE IS SUSPENSION AND
SKEPTICISM.
THEY HAVE TO GET OVER 200 HOUSE
REPUBLICANS AND GIVEN SUSPICION
OF PRESIDENT, IMMIGRATION AND
EXECUTIVE POWER, ENVIRONMENT,
YOU KNOW, IT'S GOING TO BE A
TOUGH HAUL FOR THEM, GIVEN THEIR
ANIMOSITY TO THEM.
>> I HATE TO LET THAT ONE GO.
I KNOW THERE IS MUCH MORE TO
SAY.
QUICKLY TO BOTH OF YOU OBSERVE
JEB BUSH.
TOUGH WEEK, DAVID, HE HAD, WHEN
HE ANSWERED A QUESTION ABOUT
WHAT HE WOULD DO WHAT HIS
BROTHER DID IN GOING INTO IRAQ
AND TAKING THE UNITED STATES
INTO IRAQ, KNOWING WHAT WE KNOW
TODAY.
HE ADD FIRST SAID, YES, I WOULD.
AND THEN HE BACKED OFF AND GAVE
DIFFERENT ANSWERS.
WHAT'S THE IMPACT OF ALL THIS?
>> WELL, PERSONALLY, A LITTLE
FRATERNAL LOYALTY ON THAT.
I KNOW HE WAS TORN ON THAT.
HE CAN BE JUDGED HARSHLY.
HE DID NOT HANDLE THIS WELL OVER
THE WEEK.
THE FINAL, MOST SURPRISING THING
TO ME IS THE REST OF THE PARTY
SEEMS SWITCHED AS TO WHETHER THE
IRAQ WAR WAS A MISTAKE.
THE OTHER CANDIDATES CAME OUT
AND SAID OBVIOUSLY IT WAS A
MISTAKE GIVEN WHAT WE KNOW HOW .
THEY DECIDED THE WAR WAS A
MISTAKE AFTER NOT ADMITTING THAT
FOR A LONG TIME.
I'M STRUCK ON HOW THE PARTY
SHIFTED ON THIS ISSUE IN THREE
DAYS.
>> A TERRIBLE PERFORMANCE BY JEB
BUSH.
IN HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY GEORGE W.
BUSH WROTE THE REALITY WAS I HAD
SENT AMERICAN TROOPS INTO COMBAT
BASED IN LARGE PART UPON
INTELLIGENCE THAT PROVED FALSE.
HE ADMITTED.
GEORGE W. CALLED IT FAULTY, JEB
BUSH -- JEB SAID IT WAS FAULTY,
GEORGE W. CALLED IT FALSE.
JEB BUSH, HE WAS THE SMART
BROTHER AND THIS IS A TERRIBLE
PERFORMANCE.
I THINK IT WAS LESS THAN
HELPFUL.
>> Woodruff: HE SPENT THE REST
OF THE WEEK ANSWERING THE
QUESTION A DIFFERENT WAY.
GOING INTO THE WEEKEND.
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO A SCHOOL
TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION OF
GREAT ARTISTS.
AT THE BALTIMORE SCHOOL FOR THE
ARTS, A PRE-PROFESSIONAL HIGH
SCHOOL, STUDENTS ARE ADMITTED
SOLELY ON THEIR ARTISTIC
POTENTIAL WITHOUT A REVIEW OF
ANY ACADEMIC GRADES.
STILL THE SCHOOL'S STUDENTS HAVE
SOME OF THE HIGHEST TESTS SCORES
IN THE STATE OF MARYLAND.
NOTABLE ALUMNI INCLUDE ACTOR
JADA PINKETT SMITH AND FASHION
DESIGNER CHRISTIAN SIRIANO.
WE FOLLOWED THE STUDENTS BEFORE
THE RECENT PROTESTS AND UNREST
IN THE CITY.
AND FOUND THEIR COMBINATION OF
DEDICATION AND FOCUS, INSPIRING,
TAKE A LOOK:
>> MY FAMILY ISN'T IN THE ARTS.
I'M THE ONLY PERSON WHO REALLY
DOES, LIKE, CLASSICAL MUSIC.
I'M THE ONLY PERSON WHO LIKE
TAKES LESSONS AND GOES TO A
SCHOOL LIKE THIS.
MY NAME IS MATEEN MILAN.
I'M IN THE TWELFTH GRADE AND I
GO TO BALTIMORE SCHOOL FOR THE
ARTS.
>> IT ALL STARTED OUT WHEN I WAS
JUST ON MY OWN DOING STREET
DANCE.
AND MY FRIENDS WENT AND TOLD MY
TEACHER THAT I WAS DANCING.
AND I SHOWED HER AND SHE TOLD ME
THAT I SHOULD TRY OUT FOR
BALTIMORE SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS.
MY NAME IS MAURICE MOUZON.
I'M A 12TH GRADER AT BALTIMORE
SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS.
>> KIDS ENTER BY AUDITION.
WE DON'T LOOK AT THEIR ACADEMICS
AT ALL WHICH IS AN INTERESTING
PIECE.
AND THEY FOLLOW A PRE-
PROFESSIONAL ARTS PROGRAM AS
WELL AS A COLLEGE PREP ACADEMIC
PROGRAM.
MY NAME IS CHRIS FORD, AND I'M
THE DIRECTOR OF THE BALTIMORE
SCHOOL OF THE ARTS.
>> I PLAY THE BASSOON.
AND I LOVE EVERY SECOND OF IT.
>> I'M STILL TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT ELSE THAT I WANNA DO
WITH MY LIFE.
BUT RIGHT NOW, MY MAIN FOCUS IS
DANCE.
>> STUDENTS, WHEN THEY'RE
PASSIONATE ABOUT SOMETHING, AND
THEY BECOME PASSIONATE ABOUT
HEATTER, OR VISUAL ARTS OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT, IT'S EASY
TO SPREAD THAT PASSION OUT INTO
OTHER ACTIVITIES LIKE GEOMETRY
OR ENGLISH LITERATURE.
>> MY FRIENDS WERE VERY
SUPPORTIVE OF IT.
I KNOW MOST OF THEM PLAY SPORTS
LIKE FOOTBALL AND BASKETBALL.
AND THAT'S ACTUALLY WHERE I CAME
FROM, SPORTS.
AND IT WAS KINDA DIFFICULT
CHANGING.
>> SOME OF THE KIDS I'VE BEEN
WORKING WITH IN THIS PROJECT I
KNOW THAT THEY'RE COMING FROM
EXTREMELY DIFFICULT HOME LIVES.
>> MY NAME IS KATHERINE HELEN
FISHER.
I AM A DIRECTOR, CHOREOGRAPHER,
AND PRODUCER.
>> KATE FISHER, SHE'S AN ALUMNI
FROM THE SCHOOL AND SHE'S HERE
TEACHING US HOW TO USE OUR
BODIES MORE AND TO JUST LIKE
FEEL THE MUSIC.
>> THERE'S A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT
OF DIVERSITY, THERE'S PEOPLE ON
THE VERY BOTTOM OF THE ECONOMIC
SCALE AND PEOPLE AT THE TOP.
>> PEOPLE THAT COME FROM
FAMILIES THAT ARE WELL TO DO AND
PEOPLE THAT COME FROM FAMILIES
THAT HAVE NOTHING HERE IN THIS
CITY.
>> THIS SCHOOL IS SORT OF LIKE A
HIDDEN GEM.
BUT PROFESSIONAL ARTISTS HAVE
KNOWN ABOUT THIS INSTITUTION FOR
A LONG TIME.
>> IT'S REALLY INSRINGPI TO KNOW
THAT THEIR GETTING THE TOOLS
THAT CAN TAKE THEM TO GREAT
PLACES.
>> I'M MARCOS BALTER, I'M A
COMPOSER.
I LOVE THINGS THAT YOU CAN
ALMOST UNDERSTAND BUT YOU CAN'T
QUITE GET IT.
AND THAT'S WHAT I'VE TRIED TO DO
WITH MY MUSIC.
>> I MYSELF IN TERMS OF BEING A
BALTIMOREAN COMING FROM A FAMILY
OF A SINGLE MOTHER, FAMILY
STRUGGLING HAVE GOTTEN TO SEE
THE WORLD MANY TIMES OVER, AND
HAD EXPERIENCES I WOULD NEVER
HAVE AFFORDED HAD I NOT HAD A
CAREER IN THE ARTS.
>> MY FAVORITE AGE GROUP TO WORK
WITH ARE TEENS, AND PRE-TEENS,
AND KIDS BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE
A PRECONCEIVED NOTION OF WHAT IS
POSSIBLE, AND WHAT MAY NOT BE.
>> I FEEL THAT THE MAJORITY OF
THE STUD
FOR SURE ARE GOING TO DEDICATE
THEIR LIFE TO THEIR CRAFT IN ONE
WAY OR ANOTHER.
>> I FIND MYSELF MAYBE ONCE OR
TWICE A WEEK QUESTIONING MYSELF
DO I REALLY WANNA DO THIS?
AM I I'M ACTUALLY GOOD AT WHAT I
DO?
>> IT SEEMS LIKE MUSIC EDUCATION
IS NOT IN ITS BEST PERIOD RIGHT
NOW.
>> IT'S A DIMINISHING RESOURCE
ENVIRONMENT AND WE'RE TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO DEAL WITH
THAT.
>> A LOT OF BUDGET CUTS, UM A
LOT OF CANCELLED PROGRAMS, A LOT
OF FOCUS ON JUST SORT OF THE
MORE SCHOLASTIC SIDE UH OF
EDUCATION WHICH I THINK IS A
SHAME.
>> I THINK OF ART AS A TUNNEL.
A TUNNEL THAT GETS YOU FROM ONE
PLACE OF UNDERSTANDING TO
ANOTHER.
I WOULDN'T KNOW ABOUT MANY
CULTURES IF IT WASN'T FOR THE
ART THAT COMES FROM THOSE
CULTURES.
>> I AM WORRIED ABOUT MAKING A
PROFESSIONAL CAREER OUT OF DANCE
BECAUSE IN THE DANCE WORLD IT'S
VERY DIFFICULT BECAUSE YOU HAVE
SO MANY PEOPLE WHO WANT TO BE A
DANCER AND NOT EVERYBODY CAN
MAKE IT.
>> THE ONLY WAY THAT YOU CAN
ACTUALLY PERSEVERE IS IF IT'S
NOT REALLY A CHOICE BUT A
CALLING THAT YOU KNOW YOU CANNOT
DO ANYTHING ELSE.
IT'S NOT A MATTER OF WHAT YOU
WANT TO DO, BUT IT'S WHAT YOU
MUST DO.
>> IF YOU'VE NEVER SEEN A PLAY
BEFORE, HOW WOULD YOU KNOW
YOU'RE AN ACTOR?
IF YOU'D NEVER HEARD A VIOLIN,
HOW WOULD YOU KNOW THAT YOU WERE
MADE TO BE A VIOLINIST?
>> ART IS NOT A LUXURY, ART IS
NOT A ACCESSORY FOR THE WELL-TO-
DO PEOPLE.
>> UNFORTUNATELY IN OUR CITY,
THERE'S A LOT OF KIDS THAT DON'T
HAVE THAT OPPORTUNITY TO JUST
HAVE THAT INITIAL EXPERIENCE.
>> AT THIS POINT I'VE UNDERSTOOD
THAT MUSIC IS SOMETHING THAT I
LOVE, IT'S MY PASSION, IT'S WHAT
I DO.
AND NO ONE CAN TAKE THAT FROM
ME.
AND I CAN'T WAIT TO SEE WHERE
THAT TAKES ME IN LIFE.
>> Woodruff: MATEEN THE
BASSOONIST WILL ATTEND THE
PEABODY CONSERVATORY AT JOHNS
HOPKINS UNIVERSITY AND MAURICE
THE DANCER WILL JOIN THE STATE
UNIVSITYER OF NEW YORK AT
PURCHASE.
>> Woodruff: ON THNEWSE HOUR
ONLINE, ON THIS DAY IN 1850, A
PRICKLY HUNGARIAN OBSTETRICIAN
ANNOUNCED HIS GREATEST DISCOVERY
TO FELLOW DOCTORS AT VIENNA'S
GENERAL HOSPITAL: WASH YOUR
HANDS.
SIMPLE ADVICE, BUT PRETTY
REMARKABLE FOR ITS TIME.
READ THE HISTORY BEHIND THIS
MEDICAL ADVANCEMENT, ON OUR HOME
PAGE, pbs.org/newshour.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT SOME
UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> Ifill: TONIGHT WE EXPLORE
CONTROVERSIES OLD AND NEW.
CAN CONGRESS AGREE ON A TRADE
BILL?
DID A FATAL TRAIN ACCIDENT
CHANGE THE DEBATE OVER
INFRASTRUCTURE SPENDING?
IS THE U.S. DRIFTING AWAY FROM
ITS ALLIES IN THE ARAB WORLD?
AND WHAT DOES JEB BUSH REALLY
THINK ABOUT WHETHER HIS BROTHER
SHOULD HAVE GONE TO WAR IN IRAQ?
ALL THAT AND MORE TONIGHT ON
WASHINGTON WEEK.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SATURDAY, IS IT SAFE TO
CONTROL THE SPREAD OF DISEASE,
LIKE DENGUE FEVER, WITH
GENETICALLY-MODIFIED MOSQUITOES?
>> THE MOSQUITOES THAT CARRY
DENGUE FEVER ARE TOUGH TO KILL.
THEY ARE IMMUNE TO MANY
INSECTICIDES AND BREED IN
SOMETIMES HARD-TO-REACH PLACES,
LIKE UNDERNEATH HOUSES OR IN THE
LEAVES OF PLANTS.
SO INSTEAD OF SPRAYS OR PELLETS
THAT DON'T REACH THOSE PLACES,
OFFICIALS IN THE KEYS TURNED TO
A U.K. FIRM CALLED OXY TECH.
THEIR SCIENTISTS HAVE DEVELOPED
A METHOD TO ALTER THE SKIT OS'
GENETIC CODE TO KILL THEM OFF OR
LOTS OF THEM.
>> THE MALES FIND A FEMALE AND
PASS ALONG THEIR GENES.
THE OFFSPRING THAT INHERIT THE
GENES, THEY DIE, AND IF YOU
RELEASE ENOUGH OF THE MALES OVER
A LONG PERIOD OF TIME YOU CAN
GET A CRASH OF THE MOSQUITO
POPULATION.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S TOMORROW
NIGHT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
AND AN EDITOR'S NOTE BEFORE WE
GO.
THERE HAVE BEEN QUESTIONS THIS
WEEK ABOUT JOURNALISTS'
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE CLINTON
FOUNDATION AND MY NAME HAS COME
UP.
I WANT TO CLARIFY WHAT HAPPENED.
IN 2010 AFTER THE MASSIVE
EARTHQUAKE IN HAITI, I MADE A
GIFT OF $250 TO THE HAITI RELIEF
FUND, ESTABLISHED BY THE CLINTON
FOUNDATION.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
HAVE A GREAT WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.